Now last but not least, to conclude this module,
I also want to introduce you to custom page transitions.
Let's say we go to manage products here.
When we do that, we always have the default material animation page transition where the new page comes
in from the bottom, slides in from the bottom and also has this fade effect.
Now that's the default material animation, your users might be used to that,
it's also a nice animation, so of course there's no need to change it but sometimes you want your own
animation, you want to change something and Flutter supports this as well. For that, you have to build
your own page route class, so your own load a new screen class in the end which you can then hand off
to Flutter. I'll build it in a new folder which I'll name helpers and you could of course also move it
into a different folder and in there, I'll add a custom_route.dart file. I name such
because I named the class custom route and that custom route will extend the material page
route and you might know material page route from earlier in the course, material page route was used
to create this on the fly navigation with push or push replace, so not push named but just push. Material
page route is a generic class and this is signaled by adding the angle brackets and t here as a placeholder
for the generic type that can be passed in,
that would be the data that the page you're loading would resolve to once it's popped off.
So your custom route should also be a generic type and then you should add a constructor to custom route.
In that constructor, you should accept a widget builder type of name builder, so a
builder argument which will get a widget builder function in the end and your route settings stored
in a settings property, settings argument because route settings is simply also an argument the material
page route gets
and of course your custom route should be able to work with everything the material page route gets,
it should just play a different animation,
it shouldn't change the general behavior unless you really know what you're doing.
All these things should be forwarded to the parent class, so to material page route which we'll still use
behind the scenes therefore and we do this with this initialize list with a colon and then
by calling super thereafter and to super, for the builder, I forward the builder I'm getting and for the
settings, I'm forwarding the settings I'm getting, so that this all works just as before with just the
material page route and nothing changed regarding that.
So this is now fully function custom route which in the end just wraps the material page route and doesn't
add anything useful to it,
the useful thing comes now. You can add a build transitions method and my IDE helps me here with the
auto completion where I can hit enter to get this method. Build
transitions is overridden,
it's part of material page route and this controls how the page transition is animated and by overriding
this, we can set up our own animation.
It gets a build context and it gets an animation, in the end,
that is the animation which Flutter controls for you, which you can simply listen to to know at which
part of the transition you are and it will basically give you as you see a double that changes
over time which you can use for for example changing the opacity and then in here, instead of returning
super build transitions which would again just wrap the default method provided by the parent class, we
can first of all check if settings, you have the settings property right,
this is getting stored as a property by material page route and since we extend this, we can access it
here as well. Settings is initial route which means this is the first route that loads in the app,
then I just want to return child which is the page we're navigating to because I don't want to animate
that first page that's loading in. If it's not the initial route, so if we're already in the app and we're
just moving to a different screen, then we can for example return a fade transition which we already
saw earlier where we set the opacity to animation because animation here is this argument which is an
animation that animates a double and that's just what opacity needs and the child, the child route
which should be animated in is simply passed here as a child argument to fade transition and that is all.
This is now a custom route with a very simple fade in transition. Now how can we use this?
Well the way we use material page route, so in on the fly animations. So here, we can go to let's say the
products, not the products grid, there we have the hero animation but let's say we go to our drawer
and there when we go to orders, instead of using pushReplacementNamed, let's use navigator of context
pushReplacement without named and now create a new custom route here and for that, we need to import
our custom route, so import helpers/custom_route.dart. With that import added down there, we create our
custom route on the fly, we add a builder, that builder gets a context, it's the same builder you have
in the material page route because we extend the material page route and we build an orders screen here,
it's as simple as that, we need
to add one extra parentheses here and with that, if you save this, go to shop maybe and then go to the
orders screen and you see this
now just has a fade animation, it doesn't have that push from the bottom animation, it just fades because
it's using our custom route.
So this is how you can use your custom animation on a per route level.
Now what if you want to apply to all routes including named routes? Then you can go to the main.dart file
where you set up your theme here in material app and in there, you can also set a page transition
theme.
This takes a page transition theme where you set up some builders.
Now builders is a map and that is a map of different builder functions for different operating systems,
so you can even have different transitions for different operating systems,
so for Android or iOS. The key simply is TargetPlatform.android for example and
TargetPlatform.ios
and then the value after the colon has to be a builder function which defines how that should look like,
so here you need a page
transition builder. Now the good thing is our helper file here should be imported, so helpers custom
route
and in there, we have such a transition builder of course.
Now here, we unfortunately can't assign our custom route though because that's a full route and not just
a transition builder but we can go to the helper here and add another class in there,
the custom page transition builder if you want to name it like this which extends the built-in page
transition builder and in here, you need to add this build transitions method.
So you could copy that into this class here and now we need to just adjust this as a little bit because build
transitions here,
actually if we have a look at the page
transition builder, does also get the route class or the route object which controls the animation as a first
argument, so let's add page route which is a generic type route here.
Build transitions therefore also needs to be generic and get that t type here,
so we have it both on build transitions as an annotation to that method name
and on page route, this simply means that in the end this will work with different routes that will load
different pages which will return different values when they're popped off and this just is Dart's way
of expressing this relation and making sure that type support is ensured across the entire chain of
logic you're executing.
Now because we have the route here, we can now access route.settings here to check for the initial
route
and with that, this should be set up correctly.
Now we can use that custom page transition builder in our main.dart file here, sorry custom page transition
builder by instantiating it here and I'll use the exact same for iOS but you could of course define
different ones and now if you do a restart here, you should actually have that fade transition for every
route change and indeed, if I go to the shop or to the orders or back to the shop or here to the shirt,
I always have
this fade transition. So this is how you could change the transition for all your routes if you wanted
to, here through the theme with the help of the page transition theme and your own page
transition builder which is very similar to your own custom route here, difference is
you have one extra argument in build transitions here and you use it for different purposes. This
here for single routes on the fly creation, this here for a general theme which affects all route transitions
of course.